# 09-UX.pdf

USER EXPERIENCE (UX) / 

USER INTERFACE (UI) 

### M. Weintraub, F. Tip 

## Thanks go to Joel Angiolillo, Demetrios Karis, and Bob Virzi for 

## their insights and help developing this section. 

## Thanks go to to Rahul Premraj and Andreas Zeller for allowing 

## incorporation of their materials.

OBJECTIVE 

# Understand what user experience (UX) means and how it 

# matters 

# Understand how to approach UX and usability 

# Understand how to approach UI design 

WE ALL EXPERIENCE USER INTERFACES 

USER INTERFACES OF A DIFFERENT SORT 

WHAT IS GOOD DESIGN? 

# Did you ever see the time actually set on one of these? 

SOME ARE CONFUSING 

REALLY CONFUSING 

SOME THINGS ARE WELL DESIGNED 

WHAT IS USER EXPERIENCE? (UX) 

# Puts the end user at the center of the universe and defines the system from that perspective 

# Usability is finding the best match between a user’s needs and a product’s use 

# While this is a specialty by itself, a computer scientist/developer can grow an appreciation for UX, which affects 

# 1. Functionality 

# 2. System Organization and Structure 

# 3. Interactions and Look and Feel 

# 4. Access 

WHAT IS USER INTERFACE? (UI) 

## Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) research is focused on the 

## interfaces between people (users) and computers. 

## The point of interaction or communication between a computer and 

## another entity, such as a printer or human operator.  Information flows in 

## one direction or two. 

## The layout of an application's graphic, spoken, touch, or textual controls 

## in conjunction with the way the application responds to user activity. 

## UI fulfills two key UX needs: 

## 3. Interactions and Look and Feel 

## 4. Access 

WHY DO WE CARE ABOUT UX/UI? 

Because it matters 

## People will call tech support People won’t use it even when it works 

### and will return it 

### E.g. an ISP had 30% of routers returned as non-working but they tested fine 

### People won’t buy your product and worse, will tell their friends 

### not to use it 

### Measured by negative impact on Net Promoter Score (NPS) 

### Gauges the loyalty of a firm's customer relationships. 

### Is thought to be correlated with revenue growth. 

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Net_Pro moter 

POOR UX MEANS PEOPLE WON’T USE YOUR 

PRODUCT 

from “Benchmarking in Call Centers,” Diagnostic 

Strategies, (very dated data) 

http://easyerlang.com/pdfs/Call-Center-Benchmarking.pdf. 

Dated Study Of What A Call To 

Tech Support Costs 

# UX MATTERS – A TALE OF TWO MP3 PLAYERS 

Roxio emphasized an experience similar to the then familiar, Sony Walkman, and emphasized a digital experience like listening to cassettes 

 The user experience was around “pushing play” 

 The design emphasized the Walkman design 

APPL traded at ~$1.37/share 

on 10/23/2001 (ipod launch). 

Since, it has grown by 

10,714.51% (as of 2/9/2017) 

### Apple (2001)Diamond Rio (1998) 

Diamond bought by S3 

Graphics for $100M+ in Late 90’s. 

S3 Graphics reformed as 

SONICBlue, went chapter 11 in 

2003. 

Apple created an experience around creating and playing “mixes” – what went on the tapes 

 the user activities emphasized making playlists, acquiring tunes, and playing music 

 The design emphasized one thumb simple 

# UX MATTERS – A TALE OF TWO MP3 PLAYERS 

Roxio emphasized an experience similar to the then familiar, Sony Walkman, and emphasized a digital experience like listening to cassettes 

 The user experience was around “pushing play” 

 The design emphasized the Walkman design 

APPL traded at ~$1.37/share 

on 10/23/2001 (ipod launch). 

Since, it has grown by 

10,714.51% (as of 2/9/2017) 

### Apple (2001)Diamond Rio (1998) 

Diamond bought by S3 

Graphics for $100M+ in Late 90’s. 

S3 Graphics reformed as 

SONICBlue, went chapter 11 in 2003. 

Apple created an experience around creating and playing “mixes” – what went on the tapes 

 the user activities emphasized making playlists, acquiring tunes, and playing music 

 The design emphasized one thumb simple 

WHAT IS DESIGN? 

# “Most people make the mistake of thinking 

# design is what it looks like. People think it’s this 

# veneer – that the designers are handed this box 

# and told, ‘Make it look good!’ That’s not what we 

# think design is. It’s not just what it looks like and 

# feels like. Design is how it works.” 

## Steve Jobs 

R. Walker, The Guts of a New Machine, New York Times Magazine, 

Nov. 30, 2003 

DESIGN IS HARD

DESIGN IS EASY TO OVERDO 

WHAT IS A GOOD DESIGN? 

# A solution that serves the users 

# and satisfies the client 

# 1. Does what the users need and want 

# 2. Natural to use 

# 3. Helps them avoid trouble 

# Easy to say, very hard to do well 

USER CENTERED DESIGN 

Puts the end user at the center of the 

universe and defines the system from that 

perspective 

So, who or what is a user? 

# HUMAN CAPABILITIES 

# 1. Memory 

# 2. Attention 

# 3. Visual and Audio 

# Perception 

# 4. Learning 

# 5. Language + 

# Communication 

# 6. Touch 

# 7. Ergonomics (sense of fit) 

# 1. Level of experience 

# 2. Physical or mental 

# capabilities and 

# limitations 

# 3. Cultural expectations 

# 4. Language differences 

# 5. Senses of style 

# 6. Have different needs or 

# values 

E.g., I want fast acceleration, but you 

want good fuel economy 

# VALUES & SENSIBILITIES

# HUMAN CAPABILITIES VALUES/SENSIBILITIES 

# 1. Memory 

# 2. Attention 

# 3. Visual and Audio 

# Perception 

# 4. Learning 

# 5. Language + 

# Communication 

# 6. Touch 

# 7. Ergonomics (sense of fit) 

# 1. Level of experience 

# 2. Physical or mental 

# capabilities and 

# limitations 

# 3. Cultural expectations 

# 4. Language differences 

# 5. Senses of style 

# 6. Have different needs or 

# values 

E.g., I want fast acceleration, but you 

want good fuel economy 

# Challenge: there is no one User. 

# If there was, we would all be driving the 

# same car, wearing the same shoes, and 

# using the same computer. 

# YOU MUST UNDERSTAND HUMAN CAPABILITIES 

# AND PREFERENCES TO DESIGN GREAT SYSTEMS 

# YOU MUST UNDERSTAND HUMAN CAPABILITIES 

# AND PREFERENCES TO DESIGN GREAT SYSTEMS 

# Is it a good design if ~10% of 

# users can’t really use it easily? 

## Red-green color blindness (protanopia & 

## deuteranopia) occurs in 8% of males and 

## 0.4% of females 

# COLOR-BLIND PEOPLE USE OTHER CUES TO READ 

# TRAFFIC LIGHTS 

CAN YOU PLEASE EVERYONE? 

## You can have different products for 

## different types of users. 

## You can have a product for an average user and aim for average 

## within a subset of the market 

## Multiple Sizes One size fits most/enough 

No 

# Either way, you can not optimize the experience for 

# EVERY SINGLE user. You can't succeed. 

## Requirements 

## Design 

## Code 

## Integration 

## Acceptance 

## Release 

TRADITIONAL WATERFALL MODEL

## Requirements 

## Design 

## Code 

## Integration 

## Acceptance 

## Release 

# with feedback 

TRADITIONAL WATERFALL MODEL

Requirements 

Design 

Code 

Integration 

Acceptance 

Release 

## UI design itself is risky. 

### So we are likely to get it wrong.  Waterfall makes it hard to recover. 

## Users are not involved in validation until acceptance testing. 

## So we won’t find out until the end. 

## UI flaws often cause changes in requirements and design. 

### So we have to throw away carefully written and tested code. 

TRADITIONAL WATERFALL MODEL

Evaluate Implement 

Design 

Deploy 

OPTION 2: ITERATIVE DESIGN 

WHY NOT ITERATIVE DESIGN? 

# Every iteration corresponds 

# to a release, so evaluation 

# (complaints/issues) feeds 

# back into next version’s 

# design, which is too late 

# Using your paying customers 

# to evaluate your usability is a 

# big risk  

### (they won’t like it and won’t buy the 

### next version) 

# Evaluate Implement 

# Design 

# Deploy 

OPTION 3: SPIRAL MODEL 

SPIRAL MODEL ITERATIONS 

# Early iterations use cheap, 

# quick to create, and easy to 

# pitch prototypes (paper 

# prototyping) 

# Later iterations have richer 

# implementations 

# More iterations generally 

# means better UI 

# Only mature iterations get 

# released 

USER CENTERED DESIGN 

# Three Steps 

# 1. Identify who the users are 

# 2. Identify what they want to accomplish 

# 3. Constantly assess (1) and (2) 

KNOW YOUR USER 

ROLES, RESPONSIBILITIES, CAPABILITIES 

1. Ethnographics 

Age, gender, ethnicity 

2. Skill level 

Novice 

Knowledgeable, intermittent user 

Knowledgeable,  frequent user 

3. Mental or Physical abilities 

4. Knowledge 

Domain experience 

Application experience 

5. Environment 

 Noisy, quiet 

 Inside, outside… 

6. Communication patterns 

1. Who are the users: novices or 

experts? 

2. What are users trying to accomplish? 

3. How often will the user be using the 

system? 

### Should the design emphasize ease of 

### use and learning or efficiency? 

4. What information do they need to 

accomplish their task? 

5. How easily can they identify the 

information they need and the steps 

needed to accomplish their tasks? 

6. Is the information and task structures 

(aka the system) accessible to 

everyone? 

### Talking to users and potential users 

Semi-structured interviews https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Semi-structured_interview 

lots of tips for creating an interview guide and how to conduct the interview. 

Structured interviews 

###  It may be hard to recruit subjects and some users are expensive to talk to. 

THE BEST TECHNIQUE: INTERVIEWING & 

OBSERVING PEOPLE 

http://www.usability.gov/how-to-and-tools/methods/individual-

interviews.html 

HOW TO CONDUCT A STUDY? 

1. Plan topics in advance 

Best practice: create an interview guide, an informal grouping of topics and questions that the interviewer can ask in different ways for different participants. 

2. Identify the target user base in advance 

3. Give users a task to do against your interface and observe their behavior 

a) Have them think aloud about what they seeing, what they are trying to do, and actions they are taking. 

b) Take copious notes/record the session 

c) Do not lead the user.  Let them run the task until they are successful or give up. 

Struggles are important indicators that information is not organized well or that something is missing. 

4. Reflect on observations and write up a report with findings 

Source: http://www.userlytics.com/blog/unmoderated-vs-

moderated-usability-user-experience-testing 

HOW DO WE EXPRESS DESIGNS? 

## Karis and Virzi have shown you can 

## often get the same design 

## information from easier and 

## cheaper to make low fidelity 

## prototypes as from higher fidelity 

## prototypes. 

# START WITH PAPER PROTOTYPES 

Credit to: Ariel Waldman, on Interaction Design/ Rachel Ilan 

F. Cifaldi, Gamsutra, Sometimes, paper is your best prototyping tool - even if 

you're Nintendo, 2012 On the development of the Wii U tablet 

SIMPLE PAPER PROTOTYPES ARE EASY TO 

CREATE AND CHANGE 

FANCIER EXAMPLE 

# YOU ARE NOT LIMITED TO 8.5”X11”

AFTER PAPER, WIREFRAMES 

## You can also compose parts of 

## these on a computer, of course (at 

## various levels of detail, up to a full-

## fledged mockup). 

PUTS AND TAKES ON WIREFRAMING 

## 1. Fast way to mock up an 

## interface - no coding required. 

## 2. Finds a variety of problems with 

## the interface. 

## 3. Allows an interface to be refined 

## based on user feedback before 

## implementation begins. 

## 4. A multidisciplinary team can 

## participate. 

### Advantages 

## 1. Doesn’t produce any code. 

## 2. Does not find all classes of 

## problems with an interface. 

## 3. Can affect the way users 

## interact with the interface. 

## 4. Has stronger benefits in some 

## situations than in others. 

### Disadvantages 

# PRINCIPLES FOR DESIGNING UI’S 

# Jacob Nielsen’s 

# 10 Principles Of 

# UI Design 

https://www.nngroup.com/articles/ten-usability-heuristics/ 

#1: MATCH THE REAL WORLD 

### Examples 

### Desktop 

### Trashcan 

### Dangers of metaphors 

### 1. Often hard for designers to find 

### 2. Deceptive 

### 3. Constraining 

### 4. Breaking the metaphor 

###  Using a metaphor doesn’t excuse other bad design decisions 

DIRECTLY MANIPULATE OBJECTS 

## User interacts with visual representation of data objects 

## Continuous visual representation 

## Physical actions or labeled button presses 

## Rapid, incremental, reversible, immediately visible effects 

## Examples 

## Files and folders on a desktop 

## Scrollbar 

## Dragging to resize a rectangle 

## Selecting text 

##  Visual representation and physical interaction are important 

OBJECTS SUGGEST SPECIFIC ACTIONS 

(MANIPULATIONS) FOR USE 

# Perceived and actual properties of a thing that determine 

# how the thing could be used 

# 1. Chair is for sitting 

# 2. Knob is for turning 

# 3. Button is for pushing 

# 4. Listbox is for selection 

# 5. Scrollbar is for continuous scrolling or panning 

NATURAL MAPPING 

## Physical arrangement of controls 

## should match arrangement of 

## function 

## Best mapping is direct, but natural 

## mappings don’t have to be direct 

 Light switches 

Stove burners 

Turn signals 

Audio mixer 

Norman, Donald A., "Knowledge in the Head and in the World". The Design of Everyday 

Things. New York: Basic Book, 1988. 77 

### Poor mapping: 

### arbitrary 

### arrangement of 

### stove controls 

### Good mapping: 

### full natural 

### mapping of 

### controls and 

### burners 

ACTIONS SHOULD HAVE IMMEDIATE, VISIBLE 

EFFECTS 

# Examples 

# Push buttons 

# Scrollbars 

# Drag & drop 

# Kinds of feedback 

# Visual 

# Audio 

# Haptic (conveyed by 

# sense of touch) 

#2: CONSISTENCY AND STANDARDS 

# Users should not 

# have to wonder 

# whether different 

# words, situations, 

# or actions mean 

# the same thing. 

# Follow platform 

# conventions.… 

#3: HELP AND DOCUMENTATION 

# Help should be 

# 1. Searchable 

# 2. Context-sensitive 

# 3. Task sensitive 

# 4. Concrete 

# 5. Short 

# 6. NOT NEEDED 

#4: USER CONTROL AND FREEDOM 

# Users may run in trouble by using a system function by mistake and need a clearly marked "emergency exit" to leave the unwanted state without having to go through an extended dialogue 

### 1. Provide Undo 

### 2. Long operations should be allowed to be paused/suspended 

### 3. All dialogs should have a cancel button 

#5: VISIBILITY OF SYSTEM STATUS 

# The system should always 

# keep users informed about 

# what is going on, through 

# appropriate feedback 

# within reasonable time. 

## 1. change cursor to indicate 

## action 

## 2. use highlights to show 

## selected objects 

## 3. use status bar to show 

## progress 

#6: FLEXIBILITY AND EFFICIENCY 

## Accelerators -- unseen by the novice user -- may often speed up the 

## interaction for the expert user such that the system can cater to both 

## inexperienced and experienced users. Allow users to tailor frequent 

## actions. [follows from the power law of practice] 

#7: RECOGNITION, NOT RECALL 

### Minimize the user's memory load by 

### making objects, actions, and options 

### visible. 

### The user should not have to 

### remember information from one part 

### of the dialogue to another. 

### Instructions for use of the system 

### should be visible or easily retrievable 

### whenever appropriate. 

1. Use menus, not command languages 

2. Use combo boxes, not textboxes 

3. Use generic commands 

4. All needed information must be visible 

#8: ERROR PREVENTION 

## Even better than good error 

## messages is a careful design 

## which prevents a problem from 

## occurring in the first place. 

## Either eliminate error-prone 

## conditions or check for them and 

## present users with a confirmation 

## option before they commit to the 

## action. 

#9: HELP USERS RECOGNIZE, DIAGNOSE, AND 

RECOVER FROM ERRORS 

# Error messages should 

# be expressed in plain 

# language (no codes), 

# precisely indicate the 

# problem, and 

# constructively suggest a 

# solution. 

# And they should be 

# polite… 

#10: AESTHETIC AND MINIMALIST DESIGN 

# Dialogues should not contain information which is 

# irrelevant or rarely needed. Every extra unit of information 

# in a dialogue competes with the relevant units of 

# information and diminishes their relative visibility. 

TESTING THE UI 

# Testing the UI is like testing done early on, except now you 

# use the actual system. 

# 1. Give the users a task and watch them work. 

# 2. Take copious notes 

# 3. Do not steer the user 

# Frustrations and failures are part of the game 

# TYPICAL AND UNFORTUNATE REACTIONS 

Typically, when project managers observe their design undergoing a usability 

test, their initial reaction is: 

Or the typical engineer’s response: 

Where did you find such stupid users? 

It’s designed right.  

You are too dumb to use it correctly. 

# TYPICAL AND UNFORTUNATE REACTIONS 

Typically, when project managers observe their design undergoing a usability 

test, their initial reaction is: 

Or the typical engineer’s response: 

Where did you find such stupid users? 

It’s designed right.  

You are too dumb to use it correctly. 

# The users are telling you something.  Listen to them! 

EXTRA 

OUR AIM IS CREATE A SYSTEM THAT 

DELIGHTS THE USERS 

# We want to create a 

# great user experience 

# across the entire lifecycle 

# of system use 

# 1.Acquiring 

# 2.Installing 

# 3.Using 

# 4.Maintaining 

# 5.Ending 

# YOUR INTERFACE SHOULD BE SO SIMPLE A 

# DRUNK PERSON COULD USE IT 

### Someone took this seriously 

SOME, MAYBE NOT SO MUCH 

credit: http://judestewart.com/writing/Umbrellas.html 

#1: MATCH THE REAL WORLD 

# 1 

# CAUTIONS 

## Usability And Interviewing Are Robust 

#  Even if you make a lot of mistakes in the process you'll still learn a lot 

## Online Surveys Are NOT Robust 

# ! There are many, many ways to make mistakes, that will 

### often destroy the validity of the results 

### ! While it's trivial to write and distribute an online survey, but if you don't know what you're doing, there's a significant probability that you'll end up with garbage 

## The challenge is putting the 

## dialogue in the right terms and in 

## the right order. 

How to organize all the things a 

user could want to do 

! Users may not be good at forming 

their questions, expressing the 

needs. 

# USER INTERFACE IS ABOUT A DIALOGUE 

## what do you 

## want me to do? 

## Do this for me. 

Here you go 

## To construct a good dialogue, 

## one has to spend a lot of time watching 

## a lot of different people "talking" with it Everything in the product design 

## contributes to this dialog - from 

## the button labels/placements to 

## noises to screen prompts 

ORGANIZING THE DIALOGUE: TASK 

ANALYSIS 

# 1. Identify the individual 

# tasks to be solved. 

# 2. Each task is a goal. 

# 3. Start with the big goal 

# and then, decompose 

# hierarchically. 

# 1. What must be done? 

### Goal 

# 2. What must be done before to 

# make it possible? 

### Preconditions 

### Tasks on which this task 

### depends 

### Information that must be known 

### to the user 

# 3. What steps are involved in 

# doing the task? 

### Subtasks 

### (may be decomposed recursively) 

PARTICIPATORY DESIGN 

# Involve all the stakeholders in 

# the design process 

# Both for learning 

# about needs and tasks 

# and 

# sharing designs 

Source: http://www.webdesignfanatic.com/participatory-design-valuable-

designers/ 