# Fact-Sheet-Cannabis01.pdf

Cannabis Information and Discussion Sheet  The recorded history of cannabis (also known as hemp, marijuana and dagga) in modern day Lesotho dates back to the 16th century. Around 1550, the Koena people moved from what is today the Mpumalanga province and settled down, acquiring land from the San tribes and paying for it with marijuana. Additionally, in the 19th century, the population’s dependency on agriculture increased and cannabis was one of the territory’s main crops, alongside sorghum, gourds and beans.   Cannabis is also an integral part of Lesotho’s rich traditional pharmacy and is one of the seven plants most commonly cited due to its curative and magic properties. Mountain dwellers consider it to have various medicinal virtues: marijuana is used by rural people in the treatment of various maladies, such as heartburn, high blood pressure and nerves, also being used in the treatment of parasitic worms in horses and donkeys. Nevertheless, the public in general uses it for recreational purposes.  Definitions  

The cannabis plant can be cultivated both for drug and non-drug use. Cannabis cultivated for non-drug use is usually referred to as hemp, while cannabis as a drug may take the form of marijuana – dried flowers; hashish – resin; hash oil – the name given to several of its extracts. Hemp can be used in the manufacture of cosmetics, clothes, paper among others. When ingested, cannabis has psychoactive effects and has been used for thousands of years both for medical and recreational purposes. 

 Discussion Areas  Cannabis – or matekoane in Sesotho, is produced in large quantities in Lesotho. So much so that it is considered as one of the country’s three principal sources of hard currency, together with international aid and wages earned in South Africa by Basotho mine workers. The main market for Lesotho’s cannabis is neighbouring South Africa.   Although it is grown all over Lesotho, the main production areas are in the central and eastern mountainous zones and in the western foothill region. Cannabis is sown between mid August and early October and harvesting takes place between February and April. The declining condition of the land due to factors such as overgrazing and soil erosion and consequent decreasing agricultural yields (refer to Fact Sheet Arable Agriculture) have contributed greatly towards the spread of cannabis cultivation, as it can be grown in highly depleted soil.   Cannabis is a cash crop and its high market value makes it highly profitable. The Lesotho Highlands Development Authority (LHDA) estimates that although only 10% of agricultural land is devoted to the cultivation of cannabis, it represents almost 50% of total agricultural income. For example, when comparing the profits obtained from cultivating a hectare of land with different crops, the higher returns from cannabis are evident:  

Corn Wheat Peas Cannabis 

209 malotis 354 malotis 493 malotis 4,379 malotis 

 (This information was taken from Laniel, L. and is referenced in his work as: Kingdom of Lesotho, Lesotho Highlands Development Authority: Baseline Epidemiology and Medical Services Survey, Phase 1B, Knowledge, Attitudes and Behaviour—Mental Health and Substance Abuse, Final Report, Task 2, Maseru, 1996. Considering it is from 1996, isn’t there a more recent report with more recent statistics when it comes to crop profits, etc?)  Furthermore, despite their illegal character, both cannabis cultivation and trafficking “entail little social or penal condemnation” in Lesotho. Poverty affects many people, whose need to survive is used as a justification for their involvement.   Some sources mention that the LHDA considered incorporating income generated by cannabis when compensating farmers for losses incurred by flooding farm lands in the case of the Mohale Dam – what has happened in reality?   It would be interesting to know what are the actual penalties applicable by law if one is caught cultivating or trafficking cannabis. 

 Glossary of Terms   What can we do?   Topics for Debate  The income generated by cannabis is often used to pay the children’s schools fees since schooling is not cheap and for other everyday expenses. The people involved see no harm in it, as they are neither stealing nor invading someone’s property. Do you believe these are valid justifications for someone’s involvement in what is considered by the Government as an illegal activity?  In case people actually received compensation for income loss in case of relocation and loss of farm land: Although it is an illegal activity, the people who lost their agricultural land due to relocation caused by the construction of the Mohale Dam (refer to Fact Sheet Dams/ LHWP) have been compensated by their losses in cannabis plantations. Do you think this was an adequate measure? Do you think that receiving compensation from an illegal activity sends out mixed messages to the public and hinders the Government’s anti-drug policies?  Contacts  Is there any authority in Lesotho who deals directly with drug enforcement?  Further Reading     Sources  Laniel, L. 1997. Cannabis in Lesotho – a preliminary survey. Available at: http://www.unesco.org/most/dslaniel.htm#author   Mountain Voices - Panos Oral Testimony Programme. 2005. Lesotho The Maluti Mountains. Available at: Available at: http://www.mountainvoices.org/l_th_justice_and_crime.asp  Wikipedia. 2005. Cannabis. Available at: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cannabis  Wikipedia. 2005. Cannabis (drug). Available at: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cannabis_%28drug%29 