# IU-lf-00340-66196-en.pdf

The Perfect Pitch Deck 

Lessons From Analyzing 350+ Startup Pitch Decks

Table Of Contents 

## The 10 Slides You MUST Include 3 

## Slide 1: Introduction 4 

## Slide 2: Problem 7 

## Slide 3: Solution 10 

## Slide 4: Market 11 

## Slide 5: Product 13 

## Slide 6: Validation and/or Traction 14 

## Slide 7: Team 16 

## Slide 8: Competition 17 

## Slide 9: Financial Projections 19 

## Slide 10: The Ask 20 

## Slide X: Additional Slides 21 

## Recapping: What to Include in a Pitch Deck? 22 

## The Do’s and Don’ts of a Startup Pitch Deck 23 

## Pitch Deck Dos: 23 

## Pitch Deck Don’ts: 24 

## Startup Pitch Deck Examples 25 

## 2

The 10 Slides You MUST Include 

## The structure of a pitch deck is one of the most important aspects 

## to get right. 

## It’s usually a very bad idea to try to be overly creative with it. Most 

## startup investors go through a very large amount of decks. 

## Because of this, they have a checklist that helps them select the 

## projects that fit their investment profile best and to weed out the 

## bad matches as fast as possible (on average, investors spend just 3 

## minutes and 44 seconds on a pitch deck). 

## This means that it is in your best interest to cover all the topics 

## that investors expect to see. If you have a weird structure, you risk 

## hitting fewer checkboxes on the list, in which case the investors 

## won’t have a reason to consider your project more closely. 

## Moreover, a weird structure increases the chance that some of 

## your audience will be left confused. 

## The keys to a successful pitch deck are: 

## 1. To present your idea as clearly and concisely as possible. 

## 2. To differentiate your idea from other startups. 

## 3

## 3. To convince your audience of the high potential and high 

## chances of success of your idea. 

## Each slide should be created with these three principles in mind. 

## Generally speaking, there are 10 main topics that each startup 

## pitch deck should follow. This usually means 10 slides, but keep in 

## mind that if you have more to say, it’s possible to cover a topic with 

## more than one slide. 

## Moreover, if you are doing a two-minute presentation, you might 

## have to cut out a few topics. If you are forced to do that, make sure 

## to preserve the topics that contain the most convincing arguments 

## for your business. For example, skipping to talk about competition 

## is fine, but skipping to talk about your validation or traction, if you 

## have it, is a big mistake. 

## With this in mind, here are the 10 key topics that each startup 

## pitch deck should contain: 

Slide 1: Introduction 

## 4

## Goal: To communicate extremely clearly and concisely what your 

## business is offering. 

## In a way, this is the most important slide because it establishes the 

## first impression. After seeing it, your audience should have no 

## doubt in their mind what your business is about. 

## A great example of this can be seen in Airbnb’s pitch deck: 

## “Book rooms with locals, rather than hotels.” 

## 5

## They give a one-sentence overview of their business without using 

## any lingo or yogababble. This makes the information very 

## accessible. The audience already knows what the business is 

## offering after the first slide – with the first key to success taken 

## care of, the rest of the presentation has to focus only on the 

## second and third. 

## A very bad example of this is Peloton’s “On the most basic level, 

## Peloton sells happiness.” If Peloton was an unknown startup, this 

## would give their audience 0 information about their business. Very 

## few people have stationary exercise bikes as the first association of 

## happiness in their minds. 

## World-famous brands can afford this kind of language because 

## people already know what they do. Unknown startups can’t. 

## Shorthands are sometimes used to do this job effectively – e.g. 

## Uber for X industry. This is useful, but if you go for this route make 

## sure the comparison is extremely close, otherwise the audience 

## can jump to the wrong conclusion after the first slide – damage 

## that would be very hard to undo. 

## 6

## Besides the explainer sentence, it’s a good idea to have a powerful 

## visual. Ideally, you’d have a graphical element that helps with the 

## task of explaining what your business does. If you’re producing a 

## physical product, a high-quality photo of the product is an ideal 

## candidate. 

## In a way, the first slide in a startup pitch deck is reminiscent of a 

## landing page that your customer visits after clicking your ad. It 

## should communicate as much information as possible for as little 

## time as possible. 

## Including your contact details on this slide is also not a terrible 

## idea, but you could leave this for the last slide (Thank you for 

## listening, you can find us on: ) to make the first slide less cluttered. 

Slide 2: Problem 

## Goal: To convince people you are solving a real, acute pain. 

## The number one reason for startup failure is the lack of 

## product-market fit. In other words, you are building something 

## that nobody is willing to pay for. 

## 7

## The job of this slide is to convince your audience that this is not the 

## case. This means the people you are presenting to need to 

## empathize with your target customer. They need to understand 

## the problem rationally, but also emotionally. 

## How you achieve this is case-specific. A good example of doing this 

## efficiently is Nikolay Storonsky – he tells the story of how he got 

## annoyed by currency conversion and transfer fees when he was 

## traveling abroad one time, which motivated him to create Revolut. 

## This way he is not presenting a theoretical problem but is telling a 

## real story that is easier to empathize with. 

## 8

## Of course, this is not the only approach you can take. It’s also a 

## viable strategy to focus on data and to let the facts make your case 

## for you. 

## A great tip regarding the problem is to focus: solve one problem, 

## rather than many. First, a pitch deck usually doesn’t give you 

## enough time to talk about multiple problems. Second, solving a 

## single problem is hard enough, and early-stage startups shouldn’t 

## 9

## spread their resources too thinly. It’s much better to solve one 

## problem well, rather than to solve 10 problems badly. 

## Keep in mind that the ideal early-stage startup addresses a single 

## problem for a single type of customer with a highly scalable 

## single-feature solution. Complexity is a big drawback at this stage. 

Slide 3: Solution 

## Goal: To clearly present your business offering and your unique value 

## proposition. 

## Hopefully, your introductory slide has already explained what your 

## business does, which would leave you with the opportunity to 

## emphasize the uniqueness and benefits of your offering. 

## Don’t talk about features – remember that the pitch deck is a 

## high-level overview. Instead, talk about what makes your offering 

## valuable to your customers, and what makes it unique compared 

## to other solutions that are out there. 

## Ideally, your solution would be simple and highly scalable. This is 

## because as an early-stage startup you don’t have the capacity to 

## 10

## deal with a lot of complexity. Also because scalability is a 

## prerequisite to rapid growth. Remember that growth potential is a 

## mandatory quality for startups that are aiming to attract startup 

## funding. 

Slide 4: Market 

## Goal: To convince your audience that the project has an extremely 

## high upside. 

## Startups = growth. The risky nature of innovative, disruptive 

## businesses means that for the investment to be worthwhile, the 

## upside in case the project is a success needs to be big enough. 

## A general rule of thumb is that the startup should have a realistic 

## chance to return the initial investment 100x as a bare minimum. 

## This is because one winning investment needs to compensate for 

## at least 9 unsuccessful projects. Moreover, the investors usually 

## have a minority share of the business that gets diluted by further 

## investment rounds. This means that e.g. a 10% stake in the 

## business should be valuable enough to pay for the losses from 

## other projects with a sizable return on top of that. 

## 11

## Consequently, the market should be big enough. Use data to 

## present a believable (albeit big enough) number for the total 

## available market, the serviceable market, and then calculate the 

## value of your venture in the best-case scenario e.g. by using a 

## realistic market share. 

## For example, in Airbnb’s original pitch deck, they aimed for 84M 

## booked trips from their platform from 560M budget and online 

## trips worldwide, which results in a yearly revenue of $2.1B and 

## suggests a business value north of $20B. While these numbers 

## seem audacious for an early-stage startup, their 

## best-case-scenario numbers turned out to be conservative – at the 

## time of writing this, the market cap of Airbnb is $88B, and their 

## revenue is north of $4B. 

## 12

Slide 5: Product 

## Goal: To demonstrate your product. 

## While the solution slide focuses more on your offering and value 

## proposition, the product slide needs to give your audience a good 

## idea of what you’re building. 

## 13

## Doing a live demo is a possibility, but it’s only viable if you have 

## enough time. That said, even if you cannot do a demo, including 

## visual representations of your product is a good idea (screenshots, 

## mockups, prototypes, etc.). 

## In this slide, you can name the key features of your product, but 

## don’t go in-depth. Remember that this is a high-level overview, and 

## keep in mind that features change often when customer feedback 

## demands it. 

## Including some (real and positive) customer feedback about the 

## product is a good idea, because it could serve as a great sеgue to 

## the next topic, which is validation and traction. 

## If you are doing a very short presentation, you could merge the 

## solution and product slides, as they have a similar purpose. 

Slide 6: Validation and/or Traction 

## Goal: To give evidence of problem-solution or product-market fit. 

## Nowadays startup investors are more sophisticated, so it would be 

## hard to attract real interest without presenting any form of 

## 14

## empirical evidence. They are aware that most early-stage startups 

## fail because they are building something the market doesn’t 

## need. 

## If you manage to ace this part of the presentation, you can be sure 

## you’ll attract the attention of investors and potential partners. 

## In order to do this well, however, you’ll have to do work before 

## creating the pitch deck. In the very early stages of your venture, 

## this usually means running idea validation experiments. After you 

## launch the first version of your product, it means measuring your 

## traction, growth, and ideally choosing a KPI that is a good leading 

## indicator of product-market fit. 

## If you have done this work and done it well, and if the evidence 

## suggests that you are moving in the right direction towards PMF, 

## all you need to do in this slide is to present this as clearly as 

## possible. 

## If you are making a long presentation and time isn’t pressuring 

## you, it’s a good idea to present multiple metrics that speak 

## favorably of your business. If you are making a short pitch, 

## 15

## however, it’s best to concentrate on one or two metrics at the 

## most. 

## Ideally, this would be month-over-month growth (keep in mind 

## that programs like Y Combinator expect 15% of 

## month-over-month growth) in financial terms and in usage terms. 

## You should choose an appropriate usage KPI so that it points 

## strongly towards PMF. 

Slide 7: Team 

## Goal: To leave your audience with the impression that you are the 

## right people for the job. 

## It’s a common saying that a tech startup needs a hacker, a hustler, 

## and a hipster. 

## While the hipster (a.k.a. designer) is negotiable in some startups, 

## the hacker and hustler rarely are. 

## Investors are looking for the right amount of technical skills and 

## knowledge combined with marketing drive and acumen in your 

## team, and if they don’t find it, this worries them. 

## 16

## In order to make this slide effective, you should get to the point as 

## directly as possible. What experience do your team members have 

## that proves they have the necessary skills? 

## If the credentials of your team aren’t impressive (e.g. you founded 

## the startup in college), then make sure to attract at least one 

## mentor before you attempt to fundraise who was a lot more 

## experience in your field and ideally – in startups. This way the 

## presence of the experienced mentor will alleviate the fears that 

## the inexperienced founding team awakes in investors. 

## Keep in mind that how you carry yourself would complement the 

## impression that this slide makes. Investors are people and they 

## prefer working with founders who they like. Being friendly while 

## showing confidence and competence is key. 

Slide 8: Competition 

## Goal: To present other players in your market and to clarify your 

## competitive advantages. 

## 17

## Don’t make the mistake that no competition is a good indicator. 

## On the contrary, claiming there are no competitors in the market 

## tells investors two things: 

## Either you haven’t done proper market research, or there is no 

## need for what you are building – hence the lack of businesses with 

## a similar offering. Both of these options are deal-breakers. 

## Instead, try to find your biggest competitors and clearly explain 

## how your offering is different, and why you have a competitive 

## advantage. A comparison table is a typical way to achieve this 

## quickly and efficiently. 

## Moreover, keep in mind that investors are herd animals and the 

## fear of missing out is a leading force in the startup investment 

## landscape. Having other startups in your industry who are 

## managing to raise funds at high valuations and who are growing 

## rapidly helps you take advantage of this force. 

## Crunchbase is a great resource for finding this information. Keep 

## in mind that fundraising info on other startups can be used in your 

## favor in future negotiations with investors. 

## 18

Slide 9: Financial Projections 

## Goal: To present a favorable financial trajectory of the business. 

## Having an excel table of financial projections (revenue + costs) is 

## extremely important, especially if your startup is already 

## generating revenue. A lot of investors expect to see it once you’ve 

## started talking in more detail. 

## In the pitch, of course, it’s best to visualize the financial 

## information through charts. 

## Most investors expect 3 to 5 years of projections as it helps them 

## judge the cost structure of the business, its potential, and how 

## grounded the founding team is. 

## While a lot of people would say the worst thing that could happen 

## is to over-promise and under-deliver, a worse thing is not to attract 

## any investors because your projections are too low. Because of 

## this, it’s important to strike a balance. Stay as grounded in reality 

## as possible, while at the same time accounting for the fact that 

## startup investors are looking for potential unicorns. 

## Exponential growth is the key that usually allows you to strike this 

## balance. Be conservative in the short run, but let the compounding 

## 19

## of a good month-over-month growth let you achieve big numbers 

## in the long run. 

## Keep in mind that people usually overestimate how much can be 

## done in a day, week, or month, but severely underestimate how 

## much can be done in 5 years. Don’t let yourself fall into that trap. 

## Last but not least, if you are a very early-stage startup, this slide 

## isn’t that important. If you are still in the process of creating a 

## working product and finding product-market fit, it’s clear to all 

## investors that financial projections are useless. It’s better to show a 

## high upside potential in the market slide. 

Slide 10: The Ask 

## Goal: What are you willing to achieve with this presentation? 

## How much money are you willing to raise (include a range rather 

## than a specific number, and you might include stages), at what 

## valuation, and what are you going to do with the money? How long 

## is it going to last you and what will you do once this period runs 

## out (usually, this means either running an additional funding 

## round (the common option) or achieving self-sufficiency)? 20

## In case you are not fundraising but are looking for partners or 

## team members, you need to let the audience know of your exact 

## goals and circumstances. 

Slide X: Additional Slides 

## Goal: To give important information that doesn’t fit neatly into one of 

## the traditional slides 

##  Exit Strategy: Acquisition by X company, IPO, etc. Talking 

## about this too early is unnecessary, but if you are a late-stage 

## startup it’s not a bad idea to pave the way for a potential exit. 

##  Strategic Partnerships: Display any strategic partners that 

## you have and that increase your chance of succeeding. 

##  Business Model: This information should be included in the 

## product, traction, or finance slides, but in case you haven’t 

## done so – you can make a slide of its own. How your business 

## makes money is an important question to answer, especially 

## in the early stages of the project. 

##  Other Investors: They present social proof and validates the 

## project in the eyes of the investors. 

## 21

##  Advisors and mentors: Usually included in the team slide. If 

## you have more, you can dedicate a separate slide. Very 

## important if the founding team is inexperienced. 

Recapping: What to Include in a Pitch Deck? 

## 1. Introduction - Communicate clearly and concisely what your 

## business is offering. 

## 2. Problem - Convince people you are solving a real, acute pain. 

## 3. Solution - Present your business offering and unique value 

## proposition. 

## 4. Market - Convince your audience that the project has an 

## extremely high upside. 

## 5. Product - Demonstrate your product. 

## 6. Validation and/or Traction - Give evidence of 

## problem-solution or product-market fit. 

## 7. Team - Show you are the right people for the job. 

## 8. Competition - Present other players in your market and 

## clarify your competitive advantages. 

## 22

## 9. Financial projections - Present a financial trajectory of the 

## business. 

## 10. The Ask - What are you willing to achieve with this 

## presentation? 

## 11. Additional Slides - Give other important information. 

The Do’s and Don’ts of a Startup 

Pitch Deck 

Pitch Deck Dos: 

##  Use a large font and exclusively short information-dense 

## sentences. 

##  Use bullet points, don’t write whole paragraphs. The text on 

## the slides is meant to provide key info and structure. 

##  Use narrative – it’s easier to keep the audience engaged if 

## you’re telling stories rather than presenting dry facts. That 

## said, it’s easier to do this when you have more time. In a 

## two-minute presentation, you might be restricted in this 

## regard. 

## 23

##  Use pictures and other visuals (charts, graphical elements, 

## etc.). The advantage of visual info is that it can communicate 

## information at a glance. 

##  Add contact details on the first or last slide. 

##  Use slide-show templates on services like Canva. This helps 

## you create a visually coherent and good-looking pitch deck. In 

## 2022, the expectation is higher than it was 10 years ago, as 

## design tools are much more accessible. This is especially 

## important if you don’t have a designer in the team who can 

## do this for you from the ground up. 

##  Exercise making the pitch in front of people – it’s crucial that 

## you present fluently and you can deal well with time 

## restrictions at pitching events. 

Pitch Deck Don’ts: 

##  Add too much information on the slides. There’s no time to 

## read it all during a presentation. 

## 24

##  Use a unique and creative structure. The audience expects 

## certain information, you have to give it to them as clearly as 

## possible. 

##  Go off on tangents while presenting. It’s not a conversation, 

## it’s a presentation. 

##  Add too many details for a single topic. Time constraints you, 

## and it’s better to focus on the most important pieces of 

## information in a bit more depth, rather than to list a lot of 

## things without covering them at all. A good example of this is 

## including too many team members on the team slide in case 

## you are a later-stage startup. 

Startup Pitch Deck Examples 

## If you’re looking for inspiration, you can browse our pitch deck 

## database to get hundreds of great examples. You can filter the 

## pitch deck examples by industry, business model, and startup 

## stage to see the pitch decks of the successful companies in your 

## industry when they were at a similar developmental stage as your 

## business. 

## 25