# JETIR2002045.pdf

# Cryptography Using Artificial Intelligence 

Arpita Gupta1, Poonam Tiwari2 Deepak Nagaria3 

1,2. M.Tech Scholar 3. Professor 

Department of Electronics & Communication 

Bundelkhand Institute of Engineering & Technology, 

Jhansi, India. 

Abstract Cryptography is the secret code science of writing. Not 

only does it protect information from theft, it can also be 

used to authenticate users. Public keys are available in the 

feed-forward learning algorithm, depending on the 

number theory where the information or input travels in 

one direction and has the barrier that requires enormous 

computing energy, complexity and time consumption 

during the feed-forward learning generation of key. A 

neural network with a combination of feed forward & 

back propagation algorithm (BPA) can be used to 

overcome all these disadvantages, which decreases the 

mistake. 

The various criteria that the user uses to scramble the 

information so that hackers get more crisis to hack the 

information, thus offering greater safety. The simulated 

result demonstrates better results from the combinations 

of the two algorithms and thus uses lesser weights and 

neurons. 

KEYWORDS: Artificial intelligence, neural network, 

encryption and decryption. 

I. Introduction 

Cryptography was the combination of two words called 

"crypto" means hidden and "spelling" means writing. 

The hiding method of information safety emails is 

acknowledged as "cryptography." [19] The earlier 

Roman technique of cryptography, was popularly 

referred to as CAESAR SHIFT CIPHER depends on 

changing the letters of message information by AN in 

agreement variety (three was a typical choice), the 

addressee of this message information then modify the 

letters back by identical variety and procure the first 

message data [20]. With the advancement during this 

field, government organizations, military units, and a 

few company homes started adopting the applications of 

cryptography [20]. All of them used this technique to 

save lots of their secrets from others. Now, the arrival of 

computers and also the web has bought effective 

cryptography inside the reach of folk. 

Modern cryptography is that the cornerstone of personal 

computer (PC) and communication security [21]. Its 

basic relies on numerous ideas of arithmetic theory like 

variety theory, process complexness theory, and applied 

mathematics [1]. It relies on the formula for committal to 

writing the knowledge. Secrecy is made by a secret key 

that is employed because the seed for the algorithms. It 

needs parties inquisitive about secure communication to 

possess the key solely. Cryptology’s, the revise of a 

cryptosystem are often divided into 2 branches: 

 Cryptography 

 Cryptanalysis 

CRYPTOGRAPHY: Cryptography is the technique of 

constructing a cryptosystem that's able of giving info 

security. Its concern with the particular secure of digital 

knowledge . 

Cryptography concern with the look of cryptosystems, 

whereas crypt analytics studies the breaking of 

cryptosystems. The first goal of exploitation cryptography 

is to produce the four elementary info security services 

[20]. 

Confidentiality: It's a Military Intelligence (MI) Section 5 that keeps the knowledge from AN unauthorized 

person. It’s generally mentioned as secrecy and privacy 

[15]. 

 Data Integrity: It's a MI that deals with characteristic 

any alteration to the info. This service confirms may or 

may not the information is unbroken or not since it 

absolutely was last created, transmitted or keep by a 

certified user [15]. 

Authentication: It gives the identification of originators. 

It tells the recipient that the received information has been 

sent solely by associate known and verified sender [15]. 

Non-Repudiation: It's a MI that ensures that associate 

entity will refuse the possession of a previous 

commitment or an action. It’s a property that the majority 

fascinating in things wherever there are possibilities of a 

dispute over the exchange of information [15].  

Figure.1. Basic Block of Cryptography 

This figure shows a sender / transmitter who wants to 

send some data to a receiver so that the data cannot be 

detected by any interceptor in the communication 

channel. The purpose of this cryptographic system is to 

know the plain text at the end of the process only by the 

sender and the receiver.  

II. Literature Review 

Diflie & Hellmann, found a way which is based on 

numerical theories to create a secret key through a 

public channel accessible to any attacker, et al [1] .Toru 

Ohira, acknowledged the encryption method through a 

dynamic coupling function with a threshold non-linear 

and different time delays between dissimilar bits, or 

neuron, in the original data, et al [2]. Amera I.'s thesis 

developed a Jewish network through a primary 

qualitative weight that had a huge dimension to the 

cryptography process, et al [3]. Furthermore, the neural 

network has interesting properties such as high non- 

linearity, parameter sensitivity and learning ability, so 

they have been widely used as an alternative option for 

protecting information such as data encryption, 

authentication and detection. data. of intruders, etc. [4]. 

Consequently, several cryptographic algorithms based 

on chaotic nerves are proposed, et al [5-8]. In this 

article, an algorithm for a hash function in one way 

depends upon a neural network that feeds two layers 

together with a chaotic linear map by parts. The analysis 

shows that the hash function is in a way with high 

sensitivity and key against birthday attacks, et al [9]. In 

this article, the neural network uses a cryptographic 

algorithm down along with shorthand. Filter bank secret 

writing is  employed to write the wave secret separate, 

the transformation (DWT) is employed to cover the 

encrypted message, et al [10]. During this work different 

types of interchangeable and uneven cryptography are 

studied. Algorithmic program has been planned for RSA 

to implement public key cryptography by using two 

public keys and a few mathematical relationships. It is 

used for the system that desires high security with 

traditional speed, et al [11]. During this paper, the 

experimental result shows that the planned serial full 

adder provides higher results with power and time delay. 

The convergence of the planned estimate supported the 

neural network is better because of learning and training, 

et al [12].  

III. Architecture of Standard BPN A neural multilayer network with a layer of concealed units (Z units) as shown in Figure 2. There may also be 

bias between output units (Y units) and concealed units. 

Wok denotes the bias in an excessively typical output 

unit Yk; voj is marked as the bias in a typical concealed 

unit Zj. These polarization terms act as weights within 

the connections of the units output [1]. 

Only the information flow direction is shown for the 

operation progress phase. Throughout the backward 

propagation part of learning, the signals are sent in the 

reverse track [10]. The algorithm in the subsequently part is 

presented for a hidden layer, which is suitable for a large 

number of applications.   

Figure 2: BPN with one hidden layer 

IV. Proposed Method Several studies have already studied with totally different 

machine learning methodologies, specifically neural 

networks and their applications in cryptography; however 

it’s a rare technique to use the sequential state machine 

supported on the artificial neural network and on the 

chaotic neural network within the field of cryptography. 

(a) Sequential Machine 

A sequential machine output depends on the state of the 

machine and also the input equipped to the sequential 

machine. Therefore, Michel I Jordan Network was designed 

as a result of the output is taken into account as input [6]. 

This sort of input is used as a state. 

The multilayer network was designed with the help of 

Michel I Jordan Network. 

Figure 3: Michel I Jordan Network. 

There are three levels in this network: an input level, a 

hidden level, and an output level [6]. The input level sizes 

depend on the amount of inputs and also the amount of 

outputs used to state. The learning algorithm used for 

this network is an inverse (back) propagation algorithm 

and also a sigmoid function is the transfer function 

within the concealed layer. For the implementation of 

the sequential machine, a serial document and a 

sequential decoder are used. 

(b) Cryptography obtained from Artificial through 

an artificial neural network depends on a sequential 

machine of n states 

As Michel I. Jordan can implement a sequential 

machine employing a neural network, so the  

information is successfully encrypted and decrypted. In 

this state, the initial state of the sequential state machine 

will act as a key. The data is employed to train the 

neural network [10,12]. 

(c) Cryptography obtained from a chaotic neural 

network. 

The cryptography theme was designed by a chaotic 

neural network [4]. A network is recognized as a chaotic 

network if its weights and biases are evaluated by a 

chaotic sequence. Especially in digital signal encryption 

we use a chaotic neural network [8].  

V. Simulated Test Result 

(a) Sequential Machine 

A sequential machine of general status n. For example, 

the serial adder was executed using this machine. 

Input 1 Input 2 Current 

State 

Output Next State 

0 0 0 0 0 

0 0 1 1 0 

0 1 0 1 0 

0 1 1 0 1 

1 0 0 1 0 

1 0 1 0 1 

1 1 0 0 1 

1 1 1 1 1 

Table 1: State table of the Serial Adder 

Table 1 shows the serial adder status table: the current 

state represents any previous carry that may exist, while 

the next state represents the output carryover. The data 

of the serial adder status table is entered in the program. 

The following command window implemented in 

MATLAB shows several execution steps. 

A sequencing machine N is implemented and training 

data is entered. First, it asks the user to enter the entry, 

exit and status here, enter 2 entries, 1 exit and 2 states. 

Figure 4: Enter the training data in the n-State 

sequential machine 

With the help of the backward propagation algorithm, to 

minimize the error function by updating its weights with 

the same biases.  

Figure 5: Shows the plot of the error function against the 

number of iterations 

Figure 6: Representation of errors in graphical form 

Figure 7: Final output of sequential machine 

The command window above shows the final result of 

the sequential machine implemented as a serialize. There 

is an initial state informing the user to add the input bits. 

The output is the sum and the carry bit. Once the 

execution of the program is completed, it automatically 

jumps to the new transport status. This output is 

considered as a previous transfer status. 

(b) Cryptography using chaotic neural network 

A chaotic network is a neural network whose weights 

depend on a chaotic sequence. The chaotic sequence highly 

depends upon the initial conditions and the parameters, 

x(0) = 0.75, and ,µ = 3.9 are set. It is very difficult to 

decrypt an encrypted data correctly by making an 

exhaustive search without knowing x(0) and µ. 

Here a sequence of ten numbers is used for encryption 

and the initial parameters for the chaotic network are 

used as mentioned. The output or the encrypted data is 

then used for decryption. It can easily be seen that the 

output is in a chaotic state. 

Input 

Output with 

x(0) = 0.75 

& µ = 3.9 

Output with 

x(0) = 0.55 

& µ = 1.5 

       Output with 

x(0) = 1.32 

& µ = 4.7 

36 190 64 219 

                   3 150 17 252 

                   7 153 15 248 

43 167 47 212 

85 248 87 170 

52 95 53 203 

         236 60 236 19 

98 98 98 157 

79 

10 

44 

                             217 

79 

10 

176 

10 

 Table: 2 Same Input Encrypted with Different Initial Conditions 

(Values of x(0) and µ ) 

                Input               Output with                     Output with       Output with     

                                      x(0) = 0.75 & µ = 3.9        x(0) = 0.55 & µ = 1.5     x(0) = 2.43 & µ = 5.4 

190 36 

    218                      65 

150               3  132                    105 

153               7     145                    102 

167 43     163                     88 

248 85  250                         7 

95 52   94                     160 

60 236  60                      195 

98 98     98                      157 

44 79  44                      211 

217 10  217                    217 

Table: 3 Encrypted Data of Table 1 (Column 2) Decrypted Using 

Same and Different Initial Conditions 

                Input               Output with                     Output with       Output with     

                                      x(0) = 0.55 & µ = 1.5        x(0) = 3.65 & µ = 6..5     x(0) = 0.75 & µ = 3.9 

64 36 

    191                    218 

17               3  238                    132 

15               7     240                    145 

47 43     208                     163 

87 85  168                        250 

              53 52  202                     94 

             236 236  19                       60 

98 98     157                      98 

79 79  79                       44 

10 10  10                     217 

Table: 4 Encrypted Data of Table 1 (Column 3) Decrypted Using 

Same and Different Initial Conditions 

                Input               Output with                     Output with       Output with     

                                      x(0) = 1.32 & µ = 4.7        x(0) = 0.75 & µ = 3.9     x(0) 

= 0.55 & µ = 1.7                                                       

219 

36 

   65                      155 

252               3  105                   248 

248               7     102                    249 

212 43     88                     212 

170 85  7                          170 

              203 52  160                    203 

             19 236  195                     19 

             157 98     157                    157 

             176 79  211                     176 

10 10  217                     10 

 Table: 5 Encrypted Data of Table 1 (Column 4) Decrypted Using Same and Different Initial Conditions 

It is clear from table 2, 3 and 4 that we can decrypt an encrypted data correctly by knowing the exact values of x(0) and µ otherwise we get the 

wrong data as shown in column 3 and 4 of table 2, 3 and 4. 

This technique succeeded to encrypt different types of data (texts, signals type wav and binary images) and gave another advantage, 

when re-encrypting the same input data sample we obtained different encrypted data. 

When output with x(0) = 0.75 and µ = 3.9 

Figure 8: Input vs output graph in encryption 

Figure 9: Input vs output graph in decryption 

 A neural network based cryptography technique has been implemented to study encryption and decryption techniques. Accuracy is 

enhanced by proper selection of network topology and parameters in the training algorithm.   

Decryption data by using the weights which obtained from hidden layer to output layer and consider these weights as a private key. This 

technique succeeded to encrypt different types of data and gave another advantage, when re-encrypting the same input data sample we 

obtained different encrypted data. 

Related model has been simulated for various input problems. Finally, the accuracy has been demonstrated in form of Tables (table 2, 

table 3 and table 4). 

VI. Conclusion From the above results, it is concluded that the sequential machine has been successfully implemented (trained) with the help of back 

propagation algorithm, to minimize the error function and thus reduces the training time as well as the number of neurons. 

Chaotic system produces the same results if given the same inputs, it is unpredictable in the sense that you cannot predict in what way 

the system’s  behaviour will change for any change in the input to that system. 

Simulated results and related graph clearly identified parameter on which training time reduces. Therefore, the artificial neural network 

will be used as a replacement methodology of encrypting and decrypting the data. 

VII. References 

1. D.R. Stinson, “Cryptography: Theory and  Practice”, CRC press, 1995. 

2. Toru Ohire, “Toward encryption with neural network analog” Bruges (Belgium), 26-28 April 2000, D- Facto public, ISPN 2-930307-

00-5, pp. 147-152. 

3. Amera I., “Using Hebbian Network for cipher”, Thesis in computer and mathematical sciences university of Mosul/Iraq, 2003. 

4. S. Lian, A block cipher based on chaotic neural networks, Neurocomputing 72(4) (2009) pp. 1296-1301. 

5. S. Wen, Z. Zeng, T. Haung, Q. Meng, W. Yao, Lag synchronization of switched neural networks via neural activation function and 

applications in image encryption, IEEE Trans. Neural Network system, 26 (7) pp. 1493-1502, 2015. 

6. N. Bigdedi, Y. farid, K. Afshar, A novel image encryption/decryption scheme based on chaotic neural networks, Eng. Appl. Artif. 

Intell. 25(4), pp. 753-765, 2012. 

7. T.A. Fadil, S.N. Yaakob, B. Ahmad, “A hybrid chaos and neual network cipher encryption algorithm for compressed video signal 

transmission over wireless channel, in: Electronic Design (ICED), 2nd International Conference on, IEEE, pp. 64-68, 2014. 

8. S. Chatzidakis, P. Forsberg, L.H. Tsoukalas, “ Chaotic neural network for intelligent signal encryption, in Information Intelligence, 

Systems and Applications, IISA, The 5th International Conference on, IEEE, pp. 100- 105, 2014. 

9. V.R. Kulkarni, Sulabha Apte and Shaheen Mujawar, “Hash function implementation using Artificial Neural Network”, IEEE Trans., 

pp. 1-8, 2010. 

10. Salan Sarairen, “ Secure Data Communication System by using Cryptography and Stenography”, International Journal of Computer 

Network and Communication, vol. 5 pp. 125-137, may 2013. 

11. Shipra Sahu, Jai Singh, Javed Ashraf, “ Encryption & Decryption of Text Data with RSA cryptography using MATLAB”, 

International Journal of Science & Engg., vol. 3, pp. 104-110, 2015. 

12. K. Kiron, B. Srinath, and Pochamreddy Satishwar Reddy, “Performance Evaluation of sequential Adder using neural network”, 

International Joutrnal of Science & technology, vol. 9, pp. 1-5, Oct. 2016.E.C.Laskari,G.C.Meletiou,D.K.Tasoulis,M.N.Vrah atis, 

“Studying the performance of ANN networks on problems related to Crypto,” Non linear Analysis: Real World Applications, vol.7, 

pp. 937-942, 2006.  

13. Daniel J. Bernstein·Johannes Buchmann Erik Dahmen,“Code Based Crypto”, National Institute for Research in Computer Science 

and Control,2009. 

14. T.Godhavari, ‘Cryptography using neural network’, IEEE Indicon 2005 Conference, Chennai, India, 1113 pp., 258-261, Dec. 2005. 

15. M. E. Smid and D. K. Branstad, “The Data Encryption Standard: Past and Future,” Proceedings of The IEEE, vol. 76, no. 5, pp. 

550559, 1988. 

16. Bataineh, Mohammad Hindi. "ANN for studying human performance." MS (Master of Science) thesis, University of Iowa, 2012. 

17. William Stallings, eds. “Cryptography and Network Security” from principles and practices, by Pearson Education Pte. Ltd...  

18. T. SCHMIDT, dept. of computer science, ryerson university, canada - a review of applications of artificial neural networks in 

cryptosystems 

19. http://www.garykessler.net/library/crypto.html. 

20. http://www.wikipedia.org. 