# Medicinal-Cannabis_GDP-Lesotho-Compendium.pdf

LESOTHO Lesotho offers an exceptional natural and legal environment in which to profitably grow and process cannabis for medicinal purposes. 

# Invest in Lesotho’s 

Medicinal  Cannabis Sector 

I n v e s t  i n  L e s o t h o

facilitates exports to the EU, USA, China and Canada as well as the SADC/SACU region. 

The ideal growing areas in Lesotho are above 2,000m in the Eastern Highlands. 

## Introduction 

The global market for medicinal cannabis is already over $3 billion and is set to expand.  Cannabis can be grown and processed in the Highlands Region of Lesotho where there are dams to supply hydroelectric power and water. 

Production costs, including labour are low. Lesotho’s network of trade agreements 

## Medicinal Cannabis 

## Strengths & Opportunities 

Lesotho legalised the cultivation of cannabis in 2008. In 2017 it was the first African country to issue licenses for the production of medicinal cannabis under the Drugs of Abuse (Cannabis) Regulations administered by the Department of Health.  Investors can apply to the Lesotho Narcotics Bureau to establish a medicinal cannabis business. Provided that the applicant meets all the requirements, the Ministry of Health will issue a licence. The cost of a licence is LSL* 500,000 for the first year and LSL 350,000  in subsequent years.  

Lesotho’s mountainous terrain and climate are exceptionally well-suited to growing high-quality cannabis for medicinal use. 

and has cool morning temperatures, intense sunlight all year round and dry air conditions with an average of 32% humidity  suitable for production. 

The area potentially available for cultivation is large enough to avoid problems of cross-pollination between different production units. 

  M E D I C I N A L  C A N N A B I S 

LESOTHO IS 

2000m 

ABOVE SEA LEVEL 

Production costs are low thanks to cheap hydroelectricity at $3/kwh and highly competitive labour rates which are less than 20% of those in the USA and Canada. 

Land for production sites is available for lease, subject to negotiations with local land owners. Lesotho enjoys some further advantages. It is GMP (Good Manufacturing Practices) compliant - with an independent analytical laboratory that issues Certifications of Analysis (CoA), a requirement for the export of medicinal cannabis. 

It is a signatory to three United Nation Conventions that regulate international trade on narcotic substances. 

It has attractive incentives for medicinal cannabis and levies a manufacturing tax of just 10% with 0% tax on dividends. 

It has good road connections with South Africa through which cannabis products can be exported under bond. 

The growth of cannabis and its processing into medicinal products is subject to state regulation. 

  The project aligns with  Sustainable Development  Goals 1, 3, 8, 9 and 12. 

I n v e s t  i n  L e s o t h o 

2 

200 kms / 124 miles 

Northern Cape 

Western Cape 

Eastern Cape 

Free State 

North  West 

Limpopo 

Mpumalanga Gauteng 

Lesotho 

 KwaZulu -Natal 

Port ElizabethCape Town 

East London 

Durban 

Richards Bay 

50 kms / 31 miles 

1000 kms / 621 miles 

Lesotho 

South Africa 

Maseru 

Eastern Highlands 

* 1 LSL = 1 ZAR

Example of a site for growing and processing medicinal cannabis. 

## Medicinal  Cannabis 

## Financial Analysis 

TOTAL INVESTMENT A total investment of approximately: 

NET PROFIT The enterprise`s annual net profit after tax increases from approximately: 

comprising fixed assets of LSL 306m, pre-production expenditure of LSL 10.2m  and initial working capital of LSL 30.6m, will be required for the establishment of the Medicinal Cannabis enterprise. The graphs below illustrate a financially viable operation with the enterprise expected to generate a profit throughout its operational life. 

in year 1 to approximately: 

in year 10. Similarly, the projected cash flows  of the envisaged investment opportunity indicate that the project will generate positive net cash flows throughout the 10-year operational period. 

LSL 350m LSL 974m LSL 103m 

### LSL 974m 

### LSL 103m 

  M E D I C I N A L  C A N N A B I S 

43I n v e s t  i n  L e s o t h o 

In addition to the positive NPV and IRR, the initial investment cost of the project is expected to be fully recovered in a little over 4 years. The investment opportunity further responds favourably to Lesotho`s developmental objectives through its positive socio-economic impact in terms of employment creation, economic agglomeration and potential forex  earning opportunities. 

YEAR 10YEAR 1 

NET PROFIT NET PROFIT

## Financial Analysis 

The projected future cash flows generated by the enterprise are discounted at a rate of 16%. The outcome of the discounted cash flow analysis is summarized in Table 1. 

 Table 1: Investment Indicators 

Net present value (NPV) LSL 1.25b 

Discounted payback period 4.05 years 

Internal rate of return (IRR) 57.81% 

Profitability index (PI) 5 

## Financial Analysis 

3 500 000 

4 000 000 

4 500 000 

3 000 000 

2 500 000 

2 000 000 

1 500 000 

1 000 000 

500 000 

0 

0% 

%Rate 

NPV 

5% 10% 15% 20% 25% 30% 35% 40% 

The positive NPV and corresponding IRR of 57.81% highlight the financial viability of the Medicinal Cannabis investment opportunity. 

Medicinal cannabis.Example of  site for medicinal cannabis is made. 

Figure 3: Project Net Present Value Profile 

## Medicinal  Cannabis •  M E D I C I N A L  C A N N A B I S 

65I n v e s t  i n  L e s o t h o 

200 000 200 000 

400 000 400 000 

600 000 600 000 

800 000 800 000 

1 000 000 1 000 000 

1 200 000 1 200 000 

0 0 

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 98 10 

Figure 1: Earnings Before Interest and Tax vs Net IncomeEBIT vs Net Income: LSLEBIT LSL ‘000 

Net Income LSL ‘000 

YEAR 

Net income (excluding interest) 

EBIT 

Cumulative cash flows 

Project net cash flows 

200 000 

200 000 

0 

400 000 

400 000 

600 000 

600 000 

800 000 

1 000 000 

1 200 000 

-500 000 

-1 000 000 

500 000 

0 

1 500 000 

1 000 000 

2 500 000 

2 000 000 

3 500 000 

3 000 000 

4 500 000 

4 000 000 

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 98 10 

Figure 2: Project Cash Flows 

YEAR 

Project Cash Flow LSL ‘000 

Cumulative Cash Flow LSL ‘000 

Project Cash Flows (Net vs Cumulative): LSL 

NPV Profile: LSLLSL ‘000 

DISCOUNT RATE 

NOTE 

The financial analysis of the Medicinal Cannabis investment opportunity is computed over a ten-year period. Revenue and expenditure projections are in line with industry growth prospects and market potential and have been informed by and benchmarked against industry standards and norms. In addition, assumptions relating to inflation; depreciation and salvage value; and company tax have been worked out based on the existing laws and directives of the country. The figures above represent high level estimates 

as of January 2021 and are not derived from a full feasibility study. Investors are advised to conduct their own due diligence. 

For more information  please contact: 

General Manager: Investment & Trade Promotion Lesotho National Development Corporation Email: ip@lndc.org.ls

I n v e s t  i n  L e s o t h o 

Invest in Lesotho’s 

Medicinal Cannabis Sector