# preview-9781040094747_A48483860.pdf

Endorsements 

This is an excellent book for readers who want to deepen their programming skills. It uses a low-threshold, no-ceiling approach to programming, offering the reader a plethora of practical projects that spark curiosity and demonstrate the versatile contexts of application where refined programming abilities can be applied. 

— Calkin Suero Montero, Associate Professor, Uppsala University 

This book provides an enjoyable and thought-provoking way to build up your coding skills and explore simple yet fun virtual worlds. Packed with great con-tent, it has something to offer to the reader of any level. 

— Iskander Umarov, Game Director, Helium9 Games

Playful Python Projects 

This book aims to take beginner and intermediate programming hobbyists to the next level by challenging them with exciting bite-size projects rooted in ac-tual scientific and engineering problems. Each chapter introduces a set of simple techniques and shows a variety of situations where they can be applied. 

The main feature of the book is the choice of topics that are designed to be both entertaining and serious. These excursions are a great way to hone coding skills while exploring diverse areas of human knowledge. 

The variety of discussed subjects and creative project ideas make the book a per-fect choice for aspiring coders thinking where to apply their growing skills. 

Maxim Mozgovoy is a senior associate professor at the University of Aizu, Japan. He received his PhD degree in Applied Mathematics from St. Petersburg State University, and his PhD in Computer Science from the University of Joensuu, Finland. His main research interests are focused on educational technologies, natural language processing, and artificial intelligence for games and interactive environments. His current goal is to apply machine learning technologies to the task of creating practical game AI systems. Maxim has industrial-level software development experience and a record of around 100 academic papers. He is a co-founder of Helium9 Games studio, a regular reviewer for IEEE Transactions on Games and Entertainment Computing journals, and a program committee member of IEEE Conference on Games, Foundations of Digital Games, and other international conferences.

Playful Python Projects 

## Modeling and Animation 

Maxim Mozgovoy

Designed cover image: Rabbits. Beauty Art Design of Cute Little Easter Bunny in the Meadow; stock-photo 

First edition published 2024 by CRC Press 2385 NW Executive Center Drive, Suite 320, Boca Raton FL 33431 

and by CRC Press 4 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RN 

CRC Press is an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, LLC 

© 2024 Maxim Mozgovoy 

Reasonable efforts have been made to publish reliable data and information, but the author and pub-lisher cannot assume responsibility for the validity of all materials or the consequences of their use. The authors and publishers have attempted to trace the copyright holders of all material reproduced in this publication and apologize to copyright holders if permission to publish in this form has not been obtained. If any copyright material has not been acknowledged please write and let us know so we may rectify in any future reprint. 

Except as permitted under U.S. Copyright Law, no part of this book may be reprinted, reproduced, transmitted, or utilized in any form by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying, microfilming, and recording, or in any information stor-age or retrieval system, without written permission from the publishers. 

For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, access www.copyright. com or contact the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC), 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400. For works that are not available on CCC please contact mpkbookspermis-sions@tandf.co.uk 

Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks and are used only for identification and explanation without intent to infringe. 

ISBN: 978-1-032-59583-2 (hbk) ISBN: 978-1-032-59584-9 (pbk) ISBN: 978-1-003-45529-5 (ebk) 

DOI: 10.1201/9781003455295 

Typeset in Latin Modent font by KnowledgeWorks Global Ltd. 

Publisher’s note: This book has been prepared from camera-ready copy provided by the authors.

# Contents 

Foreword ...................................................................................................... xi 

Preface ....................................................................................................... xiii 

**Chapter 1 **A bit of Python......................................................................1 

1.1 The case for Python.......................................................1 1.2 Our Python environment and toolset ............................1 1.3 Data classes....................................................................2 1.4 Turtle graphics and animation .......................................3 

1.4.1 Basic tools of turtle graphics ..............................4 1.4.2 Turtle robot commands ......................................5 1.4.3 Moving objects ...................................................6 1.4.4 Keyboard and timer events ................................8 1.4.5 Turtle toolset: a wrap-up....................................9 

**Chapter 2 **Motion and reflections .........................................................11 

2.1 A molecule of gas .........................................................12 2.1.1 Implementation.................................................12 2.1.2 Afterthoughts ...................................................17 

2.2 Ideal gas .......................................................................18 2.2.1 Implementation.................................................19 2.2.2 Afterthoughts ...................................................21 

2.3 Boyle-Mariotte’s law ....................................................23 2.3.1 Implementation.................................................25 

2.4 Thermodynamics..........................................................26 2.4.1 Implementation.................................................27 

2.5 Central collision ...........................................................30 2.5.1 Implementation.................................................32 

2.6 Free kick.......................................................................35 2.6.1 Implementation.................................................37 

2.7 Very ideal gas...............................................................39 2.7.1 Implementation.................................................39 

2.8 Brownian motion..........................................................41 2.8.1 Implementation.................................................42 

2.9 Further ideas ................................................................43 

**vii**

**viii **Contents 

**Chapter 3 **Gravity and rotation ............................................................47 

3.1 Jumping ball ................................................................47 3.1.1 Implementation.................................................47 

3.2 Newton’s cannonball ....................................................49 3.2.1 Implementation.................................................50 

3.3 Lissajous figures ...........................................................53 3.3.1 Implementation.................................................55 

3.4 Digital orrery ...............................................................58 3.4.1 Implementation.................................................59 

3.5 Spirograph curves.........................................................62 3.5.1 Implementation.................................................63 

3.6 Further ideas ................................................................66 

**Chapter 4 **Stochastic processes .............................................................69 

4.1 Calculating Pi ..............................................................69 4.1.1 Implementation.................................................71 

4.2 Monty Hall problem.....................................................72 4.2.1 Implementation.................................................72 

4.3 The bus stop ................................................................73 4.3.1 Implementation.................................................74 

4.4 Playing Pig...................................................................75 4.4.1 Implementation.................................................76 4.4.2 Afterthoughts ...................................................77 

4.5 Galton board................................................................77 4.5.1 Implementation.................................................79 4.5.2 Afterthoughts ...................................................80 

4.6 Zipf’s law......................................................................81 4.6.1 Implementation.................................................81 

4.7 Rise of cities .................................................................84 4.7.1 Implementation.................................................85 

4.8 Traffic shockwaves........................................................90 4.8.1 Implementation.................................................92 

4.9 Further ideas ................................................................97 

**Chapter 5 **Living things ........................................................................99 

5.1 A moth and a lightbulb ...............................................99 5.1.1 Implementation............................................... 102 

5.2 Dancing moth............................................................. 104 5.2.1 Implementation............................................... 104 

5.3 Homing pigeon ........................................................... 105 5.3.1 Implementation............................................... 105 

5.4 A flock of boids .......................................................... 106 5.4.1 Implementation............................................... 107

Contents **ix **

5.5 Lindenmayer systems ................................................. 112 5.5.1 Implementation............................................... 116 

5.6 The tragedy of the commons ..................................... 119 5.6.1 Implementation............................................... 120 

5.7 Further Ideas.............................................................. 123 

**Chapter 6 **Grid worlds ........................................................................ 125 

6.1 Rabbits and wolves .................................................... 125 6.1.1 Implementation............................................... 126 6.1.2 Afterthoughts ................................................. 133 

6.2 Evolution.................................................................... 135 6.2.1 Implementation............................................... 137 

6.3 Ringworm infection .................................................... 144 6.3.1 Implementation............................................... 145 

6.4 Forest fire ................................................................... 148 6.4.1 Implementation............................................... 149 6.4.2 Afterthoughts ................................................. 152 

6.5 Spread of disease ........................................................ 153 6.5.1 Implementation............................................... 153 6.5.2 Afterthoughts ................................................. 159 

6.6 John Conway’s “Life”................................................. 160 6.6.1 Implementation............................................... 161 6.6.2 Afterthoughts ................................................. 164 

6.7 Langton’s ant ............................................................. 166 6.7.1 Implementation............................................... 167 

6.8 Cellular snowflakes ..................................................... 170 6.8.1 Implementation............................................... 172 

6.9 Further ideas .............................................................. 178 

**Chapter 7 **States and transitions ........................................................ 183 

7.1 Finite state machine................................................... 183 7.1.1 Implementation............................................... 185 

7.2 Time machine............................................................. 186 7.2.1 Implementation............................................... 187 7.2.2 Afterthoughts ................................................. 188 

7.3 Needle in a haystack .................................................. 189 7.3.1 Implementation............................................... 190 7.3.2 Afterthoughts ................................................. 194 

7.4 Robot control ............................................................. 194 7.4.1 Implementation............................................... 198 7.4.2 Afterthoughts ................................................. 203 

7.5 Markovian weather..................................................... 204 7.5.1 Implementation............................................... 205 

7.6 The four seasons ........................................................ 207

**x **Contents 

7.6.1 Implementation............................................... 209 7.7 Text generator............................................................ 211 

7.7.1 Implementation............................................... 212 7.8 Tic-Tac-Toe champion ............................................... 214 

7.8.1 Implementation............................................... 217 7.9 Further ideas .............................................................. 222 

References .................................................................................................. 225 

Index.......................................................................................................... 229

# Foreword 

The profession of a software developer is becoming more specialized than ever. There are countless technologies to master, and the differences in day-to-day activities of IT professionals of different career paths are incredibly diverse. Over decades, the challenge of making software started to look more and more like a regular job, full of inevitable routine tasks, governed by “business processes”, “market demands” and other facets of the real world many of us are not overly excited about. 

This process is natural: our field matures, and maturity comes with certain downsides. However, no manager, employer or market analyst must let us forget that programming is fun. It was fun for the hackers who created the world’s famous programming languages, games, and operating systems, and it can still be fun today. It probably does not look this way from many current books and blogs that tend to be highly specialized or follow a straightforward “getting things done” approach, but this is just a matter of setting the right goals. 

The primary goal of this book is to present a collection of entertaining pro-gramming projects aimed at beginner and intermediate coders and hobbyists. In a sense, it fills the gap between introductory programming tutorials and specialized literature. Each project in the book is also supposed to demon-strate a certain interesting practical application of programming skills, to show what can be achieved with simple coding efforts. Most projects aim to simulate or analyze something found in the real world, so we will rarely, if ever, deal with abstract exercises. 

Naturally, many of the ideas presented here are hardly new or original. My challenge here is to hand-pick the topics that can bring fun and deliver some useful knowledge: a good hobby project might entertain as well as educate. (As a professional educator, I cannot overlook this aspect!) The primary cri-terion for including a certain project is my personal taste: what sounds fun to me might not sound fun to someone else. However, my rules of thumb are simple: (1) be fun; (2) provide educational value; (3) be short; (4) do not require pro skills or specialized knowledge; and (5) do not rely on the “magic” functionality of a third-party library. 

In practical terms, the last rule means that we are going to rely only on the Python standard library and write the rest ourselves. At the same time, we won’t reinvent the wheel: if something is available out of the box, we will use it. This decision sets the scope of the book quite precisely, leaving outside any projects involving larger or smaller building blocks. For example, I like the ideas of making a game with Pygame library or writing my own line-drawing routine, but not for this book. 

**xi**

**xii **Foreword 

To wrap up the discussion of objectives, let me add a bit of a personal touch. I have always enjoyed tinkering with things. It could be papercraft, soldering, knitting or stuffed toy-making. Unfortunately, as a kid I grew up in a rather cramped apartment, and my parents had a hard time finding space for my handicrafts. Most of them ended up being thrown away (typically they weren’t stellar, I have to concede). Learning a bit of programming gave me a feel for a whole new world of tinkering: I can make stuff that doesn’t take space! I can easily make as many copies of a piece as I need! Even after years of professional work, I cherish this attitude to programming—a creative endeavor of making something from nothing, and I am happy to share it with you, fellow traveler. 

Maxim Mozgovoy The University of Aizu 

Japan

# Preface 

Let me hold your attention for a little longer to discuss our roadmap. 

This book is not a textbook on Python, so I expect certain knowledge of programming in general and Python in particular from the readers. Still, we’ll start by discussing certain aspects of Python that are central to the content of the subsequent chapters. Even if your Python skills are fine, skim over this chapter to make sure you are familiar with all the concepts mentioned there. 

The subsequent six chapters are devoted to actual projects. Chapters are organized by topic, so the material in the last chapters is not necessarily any more difficult than at the beginning of the book. However, new ideas are introduced gradually, so a certain program from a middle chapter might rely on a technique elaborated earlier. Thus, I would advise reading the book in order. On the other hand, there is only a handful of foundational ideas, and their first occurrence is usually mentioned, so jumping between the project randomly is also not impossible. 

The discussion of each project in the book ends with its full Python code.1 This decision did not come easily: if a project is an exercise, its source code is a solution, which is supposed to be at least a few pages away. However, I think there is a major difference between our projects and typical exercises: a project description is an outline of a certain problem to tackle, and the proposed source code is my personal take on the solution. In most cases, its principal feature is brevity: only a couple of listings in the book extend beyond 200 lines of code. 

While examining the code, we continue discussing the original problem by considering just one particular way of turning its requirements and constraints into a Python program. You can ignore this part and try implementing the project right away. You can improve and extend my approach. You can take the challenges provided in the “Further Ideas” section at the end of each chapter. In any case, there are ample opportunities for creativity. 

Every time an interesting concept or topic is mentioned, I do my best to provide an relevant reference for further reading. Quite often I cite original works or books rather than, say, blog posts. These are not always the easiest texts to read, but they won’t disappear suddenly as it unfortunately happens with websites, and their titles might serve as good search queries to retrieve related online material. If you are not interested, just ignore these references. Similarly, feel free to skip any formulas or unclear paragraphs: no part of the book is compulsory for understanding the rest, and no topic is equally enjoyable to everyone. It is perfectly fine to focus on the bits and pieces you personally like. 

1All sources are available at https://github.com/rg-software/ppp-modeling 

**xiii**

1 A bit of Python 

**1.1 THE CASE FOR PYTHON **This book is not tied to any particular programming language or coding style. Most projects presented here can be easily reproduced in different program-ming environments. However, “easy” does not mean “equally easy”. Some languages require more ceremony than others. A textbook example of “Hello, world” program in Java looks like this: 

**class Hello **{ 

**public static void **main(String[] args) { 

System.out.println("Hello, World!"); } 

} 

This code is not only several lines long, it involves some understanding of what class or public static mean, and all this for the sake of printing one line of text on your screen. The value of these concepts grows as your project grows, but since we are going to discuss only small and relatively simple programs, their benefit is likely to be minimal. 

Python makes an easy choice for our purposes. It is concise, involves little ceremony, and has a reputation of being friendly for beginners, who start their journey with the following piece of code: 

print("Hello, world!") 

I suspect that Python is also the most popular as a first language nowadays, so I expect knowledge of its basics from the reader. Since there is no ironclad list of “Python basics”, I will have to propose my own version. 

**1.2 OUR PYTHON ENVIRONMENT AND TOOLSET **Despite its “beginner-friendliness”, Python is not an educational language. It was not designed for beginners, and it hides vast complexities behind a façade of nostalgic BASIC for 1980s 8-bit home computers. A good Python reference manual can easily cross the boundary of 1000 pages. 

For this reason, we can probably agree that any beginner should be able to write an if statement or a for loop, but it is less clear what comes next. Should it be list comprehensions or match statements, classes or data structures? It’s often hard to decide. Say, a dictionary is an essential instrument in Python toolbox, but it is based on a fairly advanced concept. To achieve dictionary-like functionality in a language like C would be quite an advanced exercise. 

DOI: 10.1201/9781003455295-1 **1**

**2 **Playful Python Projects 

For the purposes of this book, the following elements are considered “basic”: 

 Control structures (if, else, for, break). 

 Common data structures, such lists, sets, tuples, and dictionaries. 

 List, dictionary, and set comprehensions. 

 Common standard library modules, such as math and random. 

 The idea of an abstract data type (declared using the class keyword). 

Again, many of them are not simple, but they are part and parcel of Python, and deliberately avoiding them would produce code that feels nothing like Python at all. At least I managed to get around lambda functions without much harm. 

Apart from these elements, we will also rely on data classes and turtle graphics. These concepts are not difficult, but they might be outside of a typical beginner’s toolbox. Finally, it should be noted that all the projects are designed and tested in Python 3.9. Python’s backward compatibility is far from perfect, but I do not expect any issues with newer versions. As a reminder, no third-party libraries are used. 

**1.3 DATA CLASSES **A class is a basic concept of object-oriented programming, which needs to be understood for creating complex data types having all kinds of interesting properties. A data class is a simple type that merely keeps together some pieces of data and possibly provides certain utility functions to handle them. Internally, data classes in Python are built on top of regular classes. 

What can be a typical job for a data class? For example, suppose we need to represent N two-dimensional points in our code. One option would be to define two separate arrays for their x and y components: 

x = [5, 3, 2] # points (5, 8), (3, 1), and (2, 6) y = [8, 1, 6] 

A better option is to keep the components together within the same entity, which can be easily achieved with tuples: 

points = [(5, 8), (3, 1), (2, 6)] 

Unfortunately, this method has flaws. In particular, component names (x and y) are lost now. A data class fixes this issue: 

**from dataclasses import **dataclass 

@dataclass **class Point: **

x: float

A bit of Python **3 **

y: float 

points = [Point(5, 8), Point(3, 1), Point(2, 6)] print(points[1].x) # prints 3 

This syntax is a bit involved: it relies on relatively advanced concepts of a decorator (@dataclass) and type annotations (the : float parts). Otherwise, Point is a regular class with a convenient constructor, which converts the input values of x and y into Point objects. 

Data classes often benefit from another relatively advanced concept of a class method. The objects of type Point can only be constructed from two input numbers (x and y), which is not always convenient. Suppose we often need to create random points with coordinates lying in the given range. The only way to achieve it now is to pass random coordinates to the constructor of Point: 

**from random import **uniform 

p1 = Point(uniform(0, 10), uniform(0, 10)) p2 = Point(uniform(0, 10), uniform(0, 10)) 

Alternatively, it is possible to implement a method create_random() to sim-plify this code: 

**from dataclasses import **dataclass **from random import **uniform 

@dataclass **class Point: **

x: float y: float 

    @classmethod     **def **create_random(cls):         **return **cls(uniform(0, 10), uniform(0, 10)) 

p1 = Point.create_random() p2 = Point.create_random() 

A class method (declared with a @classmethod decorator) “belongs” to a certain class, so we have to provide a class name to call it. This class is passed as the first argument of the method, so our call to create_random() actually returns Point(uniform(0, 10), uniform(0, 10)). 

**1.4 TURTLE GRAPHICS AND ANIMATION **In our projects, we will use quite extensively some basic tools for graphics and animation. The only way to achieve what we need in standard Python is

**4 **Playful Python Projects 

to use turtle graphics. Making turtle module the only option for drawing is a peculiar design decision, but we have what we have. 

Turtle graphics was specifically designed as a beginner’s gateway to com-puter graphics, so it is likely that you know about it. However, we’ll push turtle a bit farther than required for drawing basic shapes; so let’s discuss some relevant aspects of its functionality. 

**1.4.1 BASIC TOOLS OF TURTLE GRAPHICS **

As we all know, a Python program by default operates in text mode: if you run a .py file with a Python interpreter, you will see an empty text console, where all the output is going to appear. To start drawing, we will need to create a drawing canvas first: 

**import turtle **

turtle.setup(800, 600) # make a 800 x 600 canvas 

Next, suppose we need to draw a line between two given points (20, 0) and (300, 200). Just issuing a single-line command to do it would have been too simple. Instead, we have to create a “robotic turtle” and give it some instructions: 

m = turtle.Turtle() m.color("blue") # choose a drawing color m.penup() # no drawing mode m.goto(20, 0) # source point m.pendown() # drawing mode m.goto(300, 200) # destination point 

If you run this code, you will first see a drawing canvas appear, then a quick stroke over the canvas, performed by a visible arrow-like “robot”, and then everything will be closed. 

To keep the drawn picture on the screen, you can add a pause using sleep() function of the time module: 

**import time **... 

time.sleep(5) # a 5-second pause 

This solution would, however, freeze the canvas for 5 seconds: you will not be able to move it around the screen or close it. A better option is to end your code with a turtle.done() call. In a nutshell, it turns the drawing canvas into a regular window, which can be moved, resized, and closed. 

Note that the turtle in the example above moves away from the screen cen-ter toward its top-right corner. The default turtle coordinate system presumes

A bit of Python **5 **

that the screen center is (0, 0), the x-axis points right, and the y-axis points up. 

Each Turtle object keeps track of its movements, which makes it possible, for example, to undo some actions or even completely remove the drawn shape from the screen: 

m = turtle.Turtle() ... # draw something with m m.clear() # remove everything drawn with m 

We will not use this capability much, but it comes in handy in one specific case. Suppose we need an updatable text label on the screen. A turtle can be used to output text as follows: 

writer = turtle.Turtle() writer.hideturtle() writer.penup() writer.goto(100, 100) writer.write("Hello") 

If we try updating the label by printing Good-bye at the same position, we’ll simply get a mess of both labels printed one on top of another. A call to m.clear() before updating the label fixes this issue. 

Line-drawing animation is helpful to understand what is going on, but it also obviously slows down the program. There are ways to make animation faster, but we can also shut it down completely: 

turtle.tracer(0, 0) # call before drawing ... turtle.update() # call to perform a screen update 

Turning off animation also turns off screen updates, meaning that we will not see any graphics at all. Calling turtle.update() forces a screen update to make the changes visible. 

**1.4.2 TURTLE ROBOT COMMANDS **

The role of the turtle in this book is to be a mere device of animation and graphic output. However, turtle graphics, first introduced in Logo program-ming language in the late 1960s, is an interesting concept on its own. 

Unlike Python, Logo was specifically designed as an educational language, targeted at children. Turtle graphics was conceived as a simple and appealing method to learn both geometry and computer programming. In many exper-iments, an actual physical turtle-like robot was used, so the kids could type commands and see it moving and drawing with an attached pen. 

The original set of turtle commands provided no options for moving and drawing in absolute coordinates: a simple robot had no way to reach a location

**6 **Playful Python Projects 

(x, y) from its current place. What it could do is turn around and move forward. Seymour Papert, one of the original creators of Logo, thought that the ability to “identify with the Turtle” was very important [39]. The point is that we can easily imagine being a robot that executes commands like “turn 90 degrees to the right, then go 10 steps forward”, and it helps to internalize what programming is all about. 

Naturally, Python turtles also support such “native” commands, and we will use them occasionally: 

# draw an L-shaped figure m = turtle.Turtle() m.forward(30) m.left(90) m.forward(15) 

Turtle graphics is also a great example of how the right mental model of a certain process can sometimes simplify our tasks. Imagine we need to draw a simple 100×100 square (see Figure 1.1, left). It is equally easy to do with conventional drawing functions and with turtle robot commands: 

# option 1: conventional drawing functions m = turtle.Turtle() m.goto(100, 0) m.goto(100, 100) m.goto(0, 100) m.goto(0, 0) 

# option 2: "the real" turtle graphics # when created, a turtle stands at (0, 0) # and looks to the right m = turtle.Turtle() **for **_ **in **range(4): 

m.forward(100) m.left(90) 

Now, how difficult it is to draw a slightly rotated square (Figure 1.1, right)? The first option looks much more complicated now, because the coordinates 

of vertices of the square are not obvious anymore, while the turtle graphics version is still a piece of cake: 

m = turtle.Turtle() m.left(20) **for **_ **in **range(4): 

m.forward(100) m.left(90) 

**1.4.3 MOVING OBJECTS **

Most of our projects will include some kind of animation. In general, animation is achieved by drawing successive frames at regular intervals. Fortunately, in

A bit of Python **7 **

FIGURE 1.1: Two equal squares drawn at different rotation angles. 

our case we will only need simple moving objects, which can be achieved by leveraging the existing functionality of the turtle module. 

The trick is to use robotic turtles of different shapes and sizes. By default, the turtle looks like a little arrowhead, but this shape can be changed or made invisible: 

... m = turtle.Turtle() m.shape("circle") ... m.hideturtle() 

Python turtle library comes with six shapes (“classic”, “arrow”, “turtle”, “triangle”, “circle”, and “square”), but this list can be extended with custom user-created shapes. 

Likewise, it is possible to adjust turtle size. This functionality is slightly less straightforward to use, however. All built-in turtle shapes fit into a 20×20-pixel square. This fact can be checked from a Python shell: 

>>> **import turtle **>>> turtle.Screen()._shapes['square']._data ((10, -10), (10, 10), (-10, 10), (-10, -10)) 

The square shape is defined as a list of connected vertices. As it can be seen, each vertex coordinate in the list lies within the range [-10, 10]. To make a turtle larger or smaller, we have to specify “stretch factors” for its shape: 

m = turtle.Turtle() m.shapesize(2) # make the turtle twice larger 

Thus, if we pass size to shapesize(), the actual shape would fit into a 20×size pixel-wide square. If a certain robotic turtle is visible, we can simply

**8 **Playful Python Projects 

change its color and appearance as needed, and move it around to obtain the effect of a motion. 

**1.4.4 KEYBOARD AND TIMER EVENTS **

Event handling is going to be a minor yet vital part of our projects. Suppose we want to move a turtle around using the keyboard. How can it be done? The turtle module lets us register handlers for various kinds of events. A handler is just a function that is going to be called when a certain event occurs. An event is, well, “something that happens”, but this “something” must belong to a list of supported events. Python’s turtle module supports only five event types: a key is pressed, a key is released, the drawing canvas is clicked, the mouse is dragged, and a timer alarm goes off. To detect a certain event, we need to register an event handler and to turn on the listening mode: 

# every time the user presses the space key, # the turtle makes 10 steps forward 

m = turtle.Turtle() 

**def **move_forward(): **global **m m.forward(10) 

turtle.onkeypress(move_forward, "space") turtle.listen() turtle.done() 

We will use keyboard event handlers to monitor specific keys, such as “space” in the code above. 

Timer alarm is an interesting type of event, because it has to be generated inside our program rather than occur as a result of user input. The ontimer() function sets up a timer alarm and specifies its handler: 

m = turtle.Turtle() 

**def **move_forward(): **global **m m.forward(10) 

turtle.ontimer(move_forward, 1000) # move forward after 1000 milliseconds turtle.listen() turtle.done()

A bit of Python **9 **

**1.4.5 TURTLE TOOLSET: A WRAP-UP **

The turtle library of Python is quite large, and we are going to use only a fraction of its instruments. Table 1.1 and Table 1.2 provide a quick summary of the functions we’ll need in the subsequent projects.1 

TABLE 1.1: Selected methods of Turtle objects. 

Method Description forward(d) Moves the turtle by the distance d in the current direction. right(a) Turns the turtle right by a degrees. left() Turns the turtle left by a degrees. goto(x, y) Moves the turtle into the location (x, y). setx(x) Sets the turtle’s x-coordinate to x. sety(y) Sets the turtle’s y-coordinate to y. setheading(a) Sets turtle’s orientation to the angle a. towards(x, y) Returns the orientation angle toward the point (x, y). xcor() Returns the turtle’s x-coordinate. ycor() Returns the turtle’s y-coordinate. distance(p) Returns the distance from the turtle to the coordinate pair 

or turtle object p. pendown() Enables drawing mode. penup() Disables drawing mode. color(c) Sets the turtle’s pen color and fill color to c. Color is 

specified with a color string2 or a triple of (R, G, B) components. 

fillcolor(c) Sets the turtle’s fill color (specified as a color string or a triple) to c. 

reset() Deletes the turtle’s drawings made so far and moves the turtle to its initial position. 

clear() Deletes the turtle’s drawings made so far. write(str) Writes the string str at the current turtle position. showturtle() Makes the turtle visible. hideturtle() Makes the turtle invisible. isvisible() Returns True if the turtle is visible, False otherwise. shape(name) Sets turtle shape to name. Built-in shapes include “classic”, 

“arrow”, “turtle”, “triangle”, “circle”, and “square”. shapesize(n) Resizes turtle shape according to the stretch factor n. clone() Returns a clone of the current turtle, having the same 

position and orientation. 

1From Python documentation: https://docs.python.org/3.9/library/turtle.html 2Supported color strings are listed in Tcl/Tk documentation: https://www.tcl.tk/man/ 

tcl8.4/TkCmd/colors.html

**10 **Playful Python Projects 

TABLE 1.2: Selected functions of turtle module. 

Method Description clearscreen() Deletes the drawings of all the turtles. setworldcoordinates (x1, y1, x2, y2) 

Sets up user coordinate system. Four passed values become new coordinates of screen corners. 

tracer(n, delay) Sets up turtle update mode. Only each n-th screen update will be performed, and the delay between the updates will be set to delay milliseconds. 

update() Forces screen update. listen() Sets the currently active turtle screen as the 

receiver of keyboard events. onkeypress(fun, key) Sets fun() as the handler of a key press event 

for the given key3. ontimer(fun, t) Sets a timer event to call fun() after t 

milliseconds. done() Starts the main event loop, responsible for the 

proper event handling. colormode(cmode) Sets the range of (R, G, B) values for color() 

to [0, 1.0] or [0, 255]. The value of cmode must be either 1.0 or 255. 

setup(width, height) Sets the size of the main window to width × height. 

title(titlestr) Sets the title of the main window to titlestr. 

3Supported key names include “Tk keysyms”, listed in Tcl/Tk documentation: https://www.tcl.tk/man/tcl8.4/TkCmd/keysyms.html